Add release notes for 0.9.0 (#457)
submariner-io/submariner-website: src/content/community/releases/_index.en.md

weight = 40
+++

## v0.9.0

* The gateway Pod has been renamed from `submariner` to `submariner-gateway`.
* The Helm charts now support Submariner deployments using the Operator.
* Broker creation is now managed by the Operator (and not `subctl`).
* Each Submariner Pod now has its own service account with appropriate privileges.
* For OpenShift, the Lighthouse CoreDNS server metrics are now included with the default CoreDNS metrics.
* The `submariner_connections` metric is renamed to `submariner_requested_connections`.
* For cases in which cross-cluster connectivity is provided without Submariner, `subctl` can now just deploy
  Service Discovery via the `--components` flag.
* Improved Service CIDR discovery for k3s deployments.
* All Submariner metrics are now prefixed with `submariner_` in Prometheus.
* With Globalnet deployments, Global IPs are now assigned to exported Services only. Previously, Globalnet annotated
  every Service in the cluster, whether or not it was exported.
* Lighthouse now allows a user to set name of CoreDNS custom ConfigMap.

> * The `strongswan` cable driver was removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `strongswan` cable driver which was deprecated in v0.8.0 release is now removed.
```

> * Configuring Globalnet on a cluster is now optional with the `--globalnet` flag.

Reviewer: Whether to enable `globalnet` or not was a deployment choice we had even earlier as well. Can you please elaborate on this point?

Author: From this I believe https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner-operator/pull/1050

Reviewer 2: This is for join - we should be specific. Looks like it was only a choice for `deploy-broker`. I'm not clear on the use case for join tho. 

```suggestion
* Globalnet can now be specifically disabled for a cluster on join via the `--globalnet` flag.
```

Reviewer 2: Please add this change as well.

weight = 40
+++

> ## v0.9.1-m1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## v0.9.0
```

Author: I think each minor release should also have a release note.

Reviewer 3: @Jaanki we discussed this over Slack (https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C010RJV694M/p1614777461479900) and the consensus seems to be that we don't want to announce each dev milestone release as a full-blown release. So we can keep this PR as a running draft for the 0.9.0 cycle, and publish together with the final 0.9.0 release. 

I also agree that we should focus on notebale user-facing changes only (and don't document each and every change), to be consistent with previous releases.

Reviewer 4: We can use the latest version once we are happy to update the notes here:

https://github.com/submariner-io/releases/releases/tag/v0.9.0-m1

Reviewer 2: If there are lower-level, internal code changes we want to document, we can add it to the specific repo's release tag notes.

> * `master` branches across all the projects are renamed to `devel`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `master` branches across all the project repositories are renamed to `devel`
```

Author: Not user facing. Removing this

> * `master` branches across all the projects are renamed to `devel`

Reviewer 2: We should keep RN's to user-facing items.

> * The Gateway engine Pod has been renamed from `submariner` to `submariner-gateway`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* The gateway Pod has been renamed from `submariner` to `submariner-gateway`.
```

> * Gateway engine is renamed to `submariner-gateway` from `submariner`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The Gateway engine Pod has been renamed from `submariner` to `submariner-gateway`
```

> * The helm charts now support Submariner deployments using the Operator.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* The Helm charts now support Submariner deployments using the Operator.
```

> * Helm charts support submariner deployments using the operator

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Helm charts support Submariner deployments using the Operator
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The helm charts now support Submariner deployments using the Operator
```

> * Broker creation is now managed by the operator instead of `subctl`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Broker creation is now managed by the Operator instead of `subctl`.`
```

> * Broker creation is managed by the operator inside of subctl

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Broker creation is now managed by the Operator (and not `subctl`)
```

> * Each Submariner Pod now has it's own service account with appropriate privileges.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Each Submariner Pod now has its own service account with appropriate privileges.
```

> * Operator and individual applications have separate service accounts with appropriate privileges

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Operator and individual Pods have separate service accounts with appropriate privileges
```

Instead of applications, shall we use Pods (or Submariner Pods)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Submariner Pods now have separate service accounts with appropriate privileges
```

> * For Openshift, Lighthouse CoreDNS metrics are integrated with other CoreDNS metrics

Reviewer 4: ^
@vthapar @skitt  @maayanf24  ^ I think it's just that we provide lighthouse CoreDNS metrics, and it's general not only openshift, right? may be I got it wrong

Author: @vthapar @skitt @maayanf24 hey. Can one of you please confirm this?

> * For Openshift, Lighthouse CoreDNS metrics are integrated with other CoreDNS metrics

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* For OpenShift, the Lighthouse CoreDNS server metrics are now included with the default CoreDNS metrics
```

> * KIND deployments support OVS CNI

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

This is not a 0.9-m1 thing, it was already in 0.8.0/0.8.1 :) (OVN support)

> * `submariner_connections` is renamed to `submariner_requested_connections` in Prometheus for OpenShift clusters

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The `submariner_connections` metric was renamed to `submariner_requested_connections`
```

Author: replaced `was` with `is`

> * For cases in which cross-cluster connectivity is provided without Submariner, `subctl` can now just deploy Service Discovery
>   only via the `--components` flag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For cases in which cross-cluster connectivity is provided without Submariner, `subctl` can now just deploy Service Discovery via the `--components` flag.
```

> * Clusters can be connected with only Lighthouse and no dataplane connectivity via subctl

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Clusters can be connected with only Lighthouse and no dataplane connectivity via `subctl deploy-broker --components`
```

Reviewer 3: For cases in which cross-cluster connectivity is provided without Submariner, `subctl` can deploy Service Discovery only via the `--components` flag

Reviewer: IMHO the sentence is a bit confusing as we are saying Clusters can be "connected" with only Lighthouse.

How about something like...

"Support for deploying just Lighthouse for Service Discovery via subctl when dataplane is already connected by the respective cloud provider"

> * Added support for Flannel in k3s deployments

Reviewer 4: ?? where does this one come from, that's been there since we adopted submariner :)

Reviewer: I think this is about the SUBMARINER_NETWORK_PLUGIN discovery fix from Masaki.

Author: Yes. This issue https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner/issues/1116

> * All Submariner metrics are prefixed with `submariner_` in Prometheus for OpenShift clusters

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* All Submariner metrics are prefixed with `submariner_` in Prometheus
```

> * All Submariner metrics are prefixed with `submariner_` in Prometheus for OpenShift clusters

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* All Submariner metrics are now prefixed with `submariner_`
```

> * Services with Global IPs can now be exported

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Services with Global IPs can now be exported
```

Hmm @vthapar @sridhargaddam  ^  

I think it's headless services, services where possible already

Reviewer: The sentence should be framed to convey the following message.

When using Globalnet, only exported services will be annotated with globalIP and will be made accessible to remote clusters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* With Globalnet deployments, Global IPs are now assigned to exported Services only. Previously, Globalnet annotated every Service in the cluster, whether or not it was exported.
```

> * `lighthouse-coredns` no longer relies on `Gateway` object to determine `localClusterID`

Reviewer 2: This is an internal detail, ie not user-facing.

Author: Someone familiar with inernal details can get confused with these changes are not mentioned somewhere.

Reviewer 2: But the website release notes aren't for devs or folks that are familiar with the internal code - it's for end users. So we try to keep these release notes higher level pertaining to end-user functionality.

> * Lighthouse uses `coredns-custom` configmap for AKS deployments

Reviewer 2: ?  @vthapar is this clear and appropriate for RNs?

> * `lighthouse-coredns` no longer relies on `Gateway` object to determine `localClusterID`.

Reviewer 2: As noted earlier, this is not user-facing.

> * Support of `strongswan` cable driver is completely removed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `strongswan` cable driver was removed
```

> * Lighthouse uses `coredns-custom` configmap for AKS deployments.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't seem user-facing either or, if it is, I think it needs more explanation (I'm not clear on it). @vthapar @aswinsuryan

Reviewer 6: Turns out the configmap name is not constant but varies from deployment to deployment. So good to capture this in case it is not working for someone's AKS deployment.

> * Lighthouse uses `coredns-custom` configmap for AKS deployments.

Reviewer 6: This is now a configurable parameter. Refer https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner-operator/issues/1166 for details

> * Configuring Globalnet on a cluster is now optional with `--globalnet` flag

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Configuring Globalnet on a cluster is now optional with the `--globalnet` flag
```

* The Lighthouse-specific API is now removed in favor of [Kubernetes Multicluster Services API](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/mcs-api/).

> 

Reviewer: The following needs to be captured as well.
https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner-operator/issues/1126

Author: That should be part of 0.9.0-M2 release note, right?

Author: @sridhargaddam ^

Reviewer: Do we have separate release notes for 0.9.0-M2? I don't think so. 
AFAICT the notes about `subctl validate ....` should be captured along with v0.9.0 release notes.

Reviewer 3: m1 and m2 are internal dev milestones. Users should just care about 0.9.0

Author: I meant a separate commit in the same PR

weight = 40
+++

## v0.9.1-m1

> * `master` branches across all the project repositories are renamed to `devel`

Reviewer 2: Please remove - this is not user-facing.

* The Gateway engine Pod has been renamed from `submariner` to `submariner-gateway`

> * Helm charts support Submariner deployments using the Operator

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The helm charts now support Submariner deployments using the Operator
```

> * Broker creation is managed by the operator inside of subctl

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Broker creation is managed by the operator
```
You're saying opposite things at the same time :) I understand the user interface remains in subctl :) but sounds clearer without that part.

Reviewer 3: I guess she wanted to say "instead"

Author: > I guess she wanted to say "instead"

yes. And edited accordingly

> * Operator and individual Submariner Pods have separate service accounts with appropriate privileges

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Each Submariner Pod now has it's own service account with appropriate privileges
```

* For OpenShift, the Lighthouse CoreDNS server metrics are now included with the default CoreDNS metrics
* The `submariner_connections` metric was renamed to `submariner_requested_connections`

> * For cases in which cross-cluster connectivity is provided without Submariner, `subctl` can now deploy Service Discovery

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For cases in which cross-cluster connectivity is provided without Submariner, `subctl` can now just deploy Service Discovery
```

Author: Added:
 Support for deploying just Lighthouse for Service Discovery via `subctl deploy-broker --components` when 
  dataplane is already connected by the respective cloud provider

  only via the `--components` flag

> * Added support for Flannel in k3s deployments

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Improved Service CIDR discovery for k3s deployments.
```

> * Added support for Flannel in k3s deployments

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Submariner now correctly identifies the CNI plugin in lightweight Kubernetes (K3s) environments
```

Author: or like what @mangelajo suggested https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner-website/pull/457#discussion_r587425287

weight = 40
+++

## v0.9.0

* The gateway Pod has been renamed from `submariner` to `submariner-gateway`.

> * The Helm charts now support Submariner deployments using the Operator.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* The Helm charts now use Submariner's Operator to deploy and manage Submariner.
```

The old `submariner` chart was removed in https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner-charts/pull/131, so it's not so much that we "now support it" as it's the only option.

> * Broker creation is now managed by the Operator instead of `subctl`.

Reviewer 5: I think Helm still uses the `submariner-k8s-broker` chart. I have https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner-charts/issues/134 tracking this, so maybe we don't need to add complexity by trying to document it here.

```suggestion
* Broker creation is now managed by the Operator instead of `subctl`.
```

Reviewer 2: The operator now runs on the broker to create the Globalnet ConfigMap et al which used to be in subctl - this entry pertains to that.  But that is more or less an internal detail so perhaps we don't need to mention it here.  @skitt

* Each Submariner Pod now has its own service account with appropriate privileges.
* For OpenShift, the Lighthouse CoreDNS server metrics are now included with the default CoreDNS metrics.
* The `submariner_connections` metric is renamed to `submariner_requested_connections`.
* The `service-discovery` flag of `subctl deploy-broker` has been deprecated in favor of the `components` flag.
* For cases in which cross-cluster connectivity is provided without Submariner, `subctl` can now just deploy
  Service Discovery.

> * Improved Service CIDR discovery for k3s deployments.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Improved Service CIDR discovery for K3s deployments.
```

They seem to consistently capitalize it.

> * All Submariner metrics are now prefixed with `submariner_` in Prometheus.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* All Submariner Prometheus metrics are now prefixed with `submariner_`.
```

weight = 40
+++

## v0.9.0

* The gateway Pod has been renamed from `submariner` to `submariner-gateway`.
* The Helm charts now use Submariner's Operator to deploy and manage Submariner.
* Broker creation is now managed by the Operator instead of `subctl`.
* Each Submariner Pod now has its own service account with appropriate privileges.

> * For OpenShift, the Lighthouse CoreDNS server metrics are now included with the default CoreDNS metrics.

Reviewer 7: Not quite, we expose the Lighthouse CoreDNS metrics in all cases (not just OpenShift) but they’re not merged with any other CoreDNS metrics.

Reviewer 2: Based on https://github.com/submariner-io/lighthouse/issues/276, I changed it to  “_The Lighthouse CoreDNS server metrics are now exposed_”, hopefully that suffices.

weight = 40
+++

## v0.9.0

* The gateway Pod has been renamed from `submariner` to `submariner-gateway`.
* The Helm charts now support Submariner deployments using the Operator.
* Broker creation is now managed by the Operator (and not `subctl`).
* Each Submariner Pod now has its own service account with appropriate privileges.
* For OpenShift, the Lighthouse CoreDNS server metrics are now included with the default CoreDNS metrics.
* The `submariner_connections` metric is renamed to `submariner_requested_connections`.
* For cases in which cross-cluster connectivity is provided without Submariner, `subctl` can now just deploy
  Service Discovery via the `--components` flag.
* Improved Service CIDR discovery for k3s deployments.
* All Submariner metrics are now prefixed with `submariner_` in Prometheus.
* With Globalnet deployments, Global IPs are now assigned to exported Services only. Previously, Globalnet annotated
  every Service in the cluster, whether or not it was exported.
* Lighthouse now allows a user to set name of CoreDNS custom ConfigMap.
* The `strongswan` cable driver which was deprecated in v0.8.0 release is now removed.

> * Globalnet can now be specifically disabled for a cluster on join via the `--globalnet` flag.

Reviewer: By default globalnet is disabled and if required, it can be enabled using the --globalnet flag.

Reviewer 4: Hmm, no she means something different, if you enable globalnet for all, then joining a cluster it can be manually disabled. But anyway, that's a workaround for an specific use case, that may be we should not publicize much?

I would remove the line altogether.

Reviewer 2: yeah it's more or less an isolated use case - I agree we can omit it.

Author: Omitted.

* The Lighthouse-specific API is now removed in favor of [Kubernetes Multicluster Services API](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/mcs-api/).

> * A diagnostic tool [`subctl validate`](https://submariner.io/operations/deployment/subctl/#validate) was added to detect issues with the
>   Submariner deployment or some configurations in the cluster that may prevent Submariner from working properly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A new tool [`subctl validate`](https://submariner.io/operations/deployment/subctl/#validate) was added that detects issues with the
  Submariner deployment that may prevent it from working properly.
```

> * Provision to notify user if `subctl` and `Submariner` versions are not matched in a setup was added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `subctl` commands now check if the `subctl` version is compatible with the deployed Submariner version.
```

> * Multiple new make-clean targets, `make clean-generated`, `make clean-clusters`and `make clean`, were added.

Reviewer 2: This is not user-facing

```suggestion
```

Author: Users are using `make` so I guess they should be aware of new features added?

Reviewer 3: I agree with Tom here. The typical user should not care about kind other then very basic things (basically the quickstart guide).

Reviewer 2: `make` is for devs - this guide is for end-users of the released product. This kind of note would go into release notes on the specific git project.

> * Submariner now supports automatic NAT discovery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Submariner now supports automatic NAT discovery. 
```
@mangelajo shall we include an additional message that - "user supplied nat configuration will be used as a fallback option?"

Reviewer 4: It's an option, that will be described in the nat section onf the website. WIP, but I'm fine with adding your explanation here too :) sounds good to me.

Author: Added it.

> * KIND environmet is now upgraded to version 0.10.
> * `version` flag of `make clusters` was renamed `k8s_version`.

Reviewer 2: These are not user-facing

```suggestion
```

Author: same. Users are going to use `make clusters` and its flags

Reviewer 2: Same reply as above.

> * New flags `repository` and `version` were added to `deploy-broker` command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* New flags `repository` and `version` were added to the `deploy-broker` command.
```

* `submariner_service_import` and `submariner_service_export` Lighthouse metrics were added in Prometheus.

> * `make deploy` now supports enabling service discovery for deployments.

Reviewer 2: This is not user-facing

```suggestion
```

Author: Ditto

> * Lighthouse agent metrics are now included in Prometheus.

Reviewer 2: I'm not clear on this. Is this a dup of L33?

Author: There are 2 different PRs for L33 and L35
https://github.com/submariner-io/lighthouse/pull/468
https://github.com/submariner-io/lighthouse/pull/464

@maayanf24 can you please confirm

> * `service-discovery` flag of `deploy-broker` has been deprecated in favor of `components` flag. 

Reviewer 2: I believe this is a dup of L15.

Author: L36 talks about deprecation and L15 talks about how to use --components flag. I can put L36 before L15

Reviewer 2: yeah that would be fine.

* `subctl show connections` now also shows `average rtt` values.
* A new tool, [`subctl gather`](https://submariner.io/operations/deployment/subctl/#gather), was added that collects various information
  from clusters to aid in troubleshooting a Submariner deployment.

> 

Reviewer 4: + Each gateway can use a different port for IPSEC/wireguard communication, via `gateway.submariner.io/udp-port` node label.
+ Gateways now implement a NATT discovery protocol that can be enabled via `gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port` node label.
+ A cluster can be configured in IPSEC "server" mode via subctl join --preferred-server flag.

> * A tool `subctl gather` is added that collects various information from clusters to aid in troubleshooting a
>   Submariner deployment, including Kubernetes resources and Pod logs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A new tool, [`subctl gather`](https://submariner.io/operations/deployment/subctl/#gather), was added that collects various information from clusters to aid in troubleshooting a
  Submariner deployment.
```

* Each Submariner Pod now has its own service account with appropriate privileges.
* For OpenShift, the Lighthouse CoreDNS server metrics are now included with the default CoreDNS metrics.
* The `submariner_connections` metric is renamed to `submariner_requested_connections`.
* The `service-discovery` flag of `subctl deploy-broker` has been deprecated in favor of the `components` flag.
* For cases in which cross-cluster connectivity is provided without Submariner, `subctl` can now just deploy
  Service Discovery.
* Improved Service CIDR discovery for K3s deployments.
* All Submariner Prometheus metrics are now prefixed with `submariner_`.
* With Globalnet deployments, Global IPs are now assigned to exported Services only. Previously, Globalnet annotated
  every Service in the cluster, whether or not it was exported.
* The name of the CoreDNS custom ConfigMap for service discovery can now be specified on `subctl join`.
* The `strongswan` cable driver that was deprecated in the v0.8.0 release is now removed.
* The Lighthouse-specific API is now removed in favor of [Kubernetes Multicluster Services API](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/mcs-api/).

> * A new tool, [subctl validate](https://submariner.io/operations/deployment/subctl/#validate), was added that detects issues with the

Reviewer 3: Change to diagnose as per https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner-operator/pull/1309
